Welcome back to the Prepare for Your SAP HANA Certification Development Associate course.
This is unit 2, Exam Preparation – Tips and Tricks,
where we're going to talk more about the content you can review
and be sure that you're comfortable with in order to successfully pass the certification exam.
So although you should certainly go through all of the courses,
and if it's been a while since you took one of the earlier courses,
run through them again in order to refresh your memory.
I want to take a few minutes here in this unit to point out some of the key concepts
you need to make sure that you're comfortable with
before taking the certification exam.
Now first and foremost is really the core understanding of
the major architectural changes that we've gone through,
in HANA development in general,
specifically with HANA 1.0 SPS 11 and higher.
And let's review a few of these right here.
So first of all, the major architectural shift has to do with the application server architecture.
So going back to HANA 1.0, SPS 05,
that's where we first introduced the embedded application server,
the XS application server, inside of the HANA environment.
And we originally did this in order to give our customers and our partners a choice of development environment,
and one which would be completely self-contained within HANA itself.
You know, as we were doing code push-down and promoting code push-down,
meaning writing as much of your application logic inside the database as possible,
we saw the opportunity to introduce a really lightweight application server
that could enable these applications that already did 80 or 90 percent
of their logic in the database anyway,
to really do the rest of the logic,
the little bit of service-enablement and web application serving
without the need to add an additional application server to their architecture.
And this had several advantages, one of which being a lower cost of ownership,
easier getting started, less administration tasks and things that had to be taken care of.
And our customers were very receptive to this idea.
Particularly in really lightweight scenarios, maybe where they just wanted to
service-enable a little bit of data very quickly.
But what we saw over time is that that lightweight application server architecture
that we had originally introduced didn't necessarily scale for all customer scenarios.
It didn't necessarily take advantage of the kind of cloud computing with its elastic computing nature
the way that we want it to for moving to cloud-based applications.
So we saw an opportunity to re-design the architecture.
And with this, with HANA 1.0 SPS 11, we introduced what we now refer to as XSA,
or SAP HANA extended application services, advanced model.
And we renamed the existing XS to XS classic.
And we do that because both are still delivered inside of HANA.
And that's the first very important thing to note and remember coming into this course
is that XS classic is still there in your HANA 2.0 system,
the HANA repository is still there, the HANA studio is still supported,
and actually all of your content is still wherever it was before.
It's still there in the old environment in XS classic.
Because you'll see here the architecture is so different in this new environment
that we couldn't just automate the process of moving it over.
It is a manual process, and often requires re-design,
certainly of the core architecture of your application, often of the security model
within your application. Therefore the two application servers are delivered in parallel
in HANA 1.0 SPS 11 and higher, and that includes HANA 2.0.
So you can upgrade to HANA 2.0 and it not be disruptive to your existing custom-developed applications
because they're going to stay in place in the old environment.
Now what's in this new environment to take advantage of?
Well first of all, we really looked at what we wanted to do in the cloud architecture.
And already a few years ago, we knew that we were going to be moving
the SAP Cloud Platform to be based upon Cloud Foundry.
And we looked at this technology of Cloud Foundry.
It's microservice-based architecture, it has multiple runtimes that can be plugged into it,
and we saw a lot of technological advantages to this environment.
So we've decided to base XS advanced on-premise on Cloud Foundry as well.
Now this has a really great benefit that we use the same core technology
both in the SAP Cloud Platform and on-premise,
which means that you can develop applications once, and with little or no code changes to them
deploy them both in the cloud and on-premise.
So that was one of the major benefits and design criteria for this new development environment.
Now one of the other criteria would be more options for the development environment.
In XS classic we have just JavaScript.
And that JavaScript is based upon Mozilla SpiderMonkey,
so it's synchronous JavaScript. There's no threading model, there's no eventing model.
So we wanted to continue to support JavaScript as a programming language
that would give us good transition out of XS classic,
but also expand what we support there.
And Cloud Foundry gives us tons of options.
There's over 15 buildpacks - that's what they call the various runtimes in the Cloud Foundry environment.
So we had over 15 buildpacks to choose from.
We couldn't support them all, so that obviously we wanted to focus on a couple of key ones
for our development, for our customers' development.
First of all, JavaScript was a no-brainer, because we needed to have backwards compatibility
with the XS classic environment, which was JavaScript-based.
But we moved from Mozilla SpiderMonkey to Google V8,
and with that, we get full Node.js support.
It brings the asynchronous programming model of Node.js,
the highly evented programming model,
and also opens this up to the world of hundreds of thousands of open-source npm modules
that we can re-use in the HANA development environment now.
So there are lots of important technology shifts there,
even if you're a current JavaScript developer, you're already familiar with JavaScript XSJS
from the XS classic environment, there's still lots in these courses to absorb
about the differences as you move to Node.js.
Next, we also introduced support for Java.
This made sense as some of our customers were wanting to migrate off NetWeaver Java
and move to something more standard.
Java remains a well-used programming model in the enterprise environment.
But the major difference here with this Java, as opposed to what we at SAP have done in the past is
this is all pure open source Apache, Tomcat, and TomEE Java.
So it is not NetWeaver Java or SAP version of Java,
This is the standard Apache Java.
And finally, all those other buildpacks that I talked about.
You're able to use them in this environment, through what we call Bring Your Own Language support,
but we don't offer the primary support for those.
So SAP primarily offers the primary support for Node.js, JavaScript, Java.
That means if you have a problem in those runtimes, you can enter a ticket with SAP
and we'll provide fixes for them.
But with the Bring Your Own Language, you can use one of the other many buildpacks,
like Google Go, or PHP, or .NET Core,
and we'll support the fact that they'll start up and stop in the environment,
but everything else that goes on inside that runtime is your responsibility.
Now an interesting thing to note here is that we have Python -
that's currently one of the Bring Your Own Language-supported buildpacks -
but with HANA 2.0, SPS 11, we will promote that up to being supported
similar to the way that JavaScript and Java is supported in this environment.
So this also shows the promise over time, as certain languages and runtimes become more popular,
and there's customer or partner demand for them,
we can promote them up out of that Bring Your Own Language
to the primary supported model as well.
So that really offers more choice in this environment,
and as you take the course, you definitely want to focus in on all these changes
and the additions of the Java environment,
but we also wanted to look at scaling better.
So the XS classic environment currently only really scales with HANA.
We can't add additional instances of the XS classic process, the XS engine,
independent of a HANA node.
In this environment, we wanted to build something that scaled independent of the HANA database,
that could be installed on a separate piece of hardware, if you want it to.
It doesn't have to be installed on your HANA hardware.
It doesn't have to be on HANA certified hardware,
so it can be installed on lower-cost commodity hardware.
So you can have a single node HANA system with 10 nodes of XS in front of it,
or, if you're not using XS that much,
you can still do the all-in-one-box experience,
where you just install HANA on the primary node of the HANA cluster.
So kind of the best of both worlds.
If you like the really easy to get started, low cost of maintenance,
just there and available, all in one box, you have that by default.
But if you need to scale, if you start using it more and you need higher scale options,
then absolutely, you can switch to that, add more nodes.
It can be installed outside the firewall.
You can put a firewall between the XS app server and the database now,
so a lot of the security architecture and setup and scaling,
and this being a three-tier architecture now,
meets a lot of the requirements that we heard from our customers from the old XS environment.
It gives you many more options.
So certainly going into the certification exam, you want to be familiar with
all the different architectural setup options that we have with XS advanced now.
And also, the other part of this, going along with the buildpacks,
is the fact that this is a microservice architecture.
This means that... microservice doesn't mean that it's necessarily small
and that it takes up less resources.
It means that each service that you build deploys its own private application server.
It takes its own copy of the runtime, the Java or the Node.js runtime.
So you get better isolation.
Even at the operating system level there's no single XS engine process
that all your apps are running inside of.
Every service that you deploy gets its own operating system process,
which means that if you have a bad performing server, there's a service failure,
it doesn't take out any of the other services.
It means that you can scale individual services,
you can allocate the memory and CPU to two particular services,
so when you need to tune your system, you can tune it very precisely
to individual services.
And it also means that over time, because we take a copy of the runtime
with each service when we deploy it, it means it's stable when you perform upgrades.
So you might put on a patch or an SPS on your HANA system
and then upgrade the core XSA runtime,
and maybe there's a new version of Node or Java available,
but that doesn't immediately change your already deployed applications.
It's not until you rebuild them and redeploy them that they would pick up the new version.
And now what that should do is give you better stability over time,
and you can feel more comfortable applying system patches,
knowing that it isn't going to change your already deployed applications,
since its only when you're ready to redeploy them and re-test them
that you can take on the new functionality that might be provided in an upgraded runtime.
Now finally, the last point that I want to make here is the change to the lifecycle management,
particularly the source code management in this development environment.
Today, whether you're doing XS, or calculation views, or stored procedures,
everything is stored in the HANA repository.
All your design time artifacts, the source code, the XML files, whatever,
they're all stored in the HANA database of whatever system that they're deployed to.
Well in this new environment, we move away from that completely,
and we go to centralized source code management using Git.
Now that's a pretty big change conceptually, for us as developers.
It means moving the source code out of the system that it's evolved in,
having one centralized copy of the source code,
having to learn about Git concepts like branching.
They're very powerful concepts here that we'll talk about throughout the openSAP courses,
and that you need to be sure you're familiar with before you take the certification exam.
And along with that concept of branching,
being able to maintain two different versions of the same development artifacts
in the same development system,
in order for that to really work, we also had to introduce containers within the database.
This is a major new concept inside of HDI, the HANA Deployment Infrastructure,
that allows us to deploy the same calculation views, or the same tables
from two different developers at the same time on the same HANA development system,
even inside the same MDC container.
And what this will do is, it really just creates separate schemas for the content
so they don't overwrite each other and we don't have name conflicts.
But now all of our development is schema-less,
meaning we can't reference the schema name,
because otherwise that would break the concept of containers,
and branching your database development objects.
We have to be able to deploy independently into a generated schema,
and then have nothing in our code that references that schema name.
So this is also a topic that we go into great detail about in the openSAP courses.
We talk about more complex scenarios like what happens when I have some content
that's in a container and some content that's not?
That would be the case with an ERP schema or BW schema.
We talk about how do we set up more complex scenarios for cross-container access,
because not everything is going to exist inside one container.
So you want to pay particular attention to these topics,
because one, they're really important to this new environment,
two, they are relatively complex.
There's a lot of new concepts, a lot of new terminology,
it really changes the security aspects of the system.
So you want to make sure you have a really good grip on the whole container concept
before taking this certification exam.
Now what I have here is a little bit of an architectural diagram
that shows you how this looks. You know, a lot of the concepts that I've just talked about
on the previous slide are now laid out graphically.
We see that we have the XS engine off to the side.
It has its own web dispatcher, which means it has its own http endpoint.
It's not sharing anything with XS advanced.
The two are completely independent.
And this XS classic in the old HANA repository in the HANA studio,
that's all going to remain for a little while.
We have announced a deprecation, that in the next major release of HANA after HANA 2.0
we will be taking that away.
But in the meantime, it stays for backwards compatibility
and to give you some time to be able to migrate your content over.
Now what we see here, when we look at the flow of an application when a request comes in,
it first really comes in, it's not drawn on this diagram, but the upper layer of the XS advanced box,
you could consider that the platform router.
So all requests come in from there and get directed to individual applications.
Now inside your individual application it's a microservice architecture,
so you might have multiple services made up of both Node.js and Java
and maybe other, the Bring Your Own Language runtime,
or now in SPS 03, Python.
But we don't want to have to do security processing in each of the runtimes.
So what we do is, all your individual runtime services
have an application router that sits in front of them.
And this is just an SAP-supplied Node.js application
that acts as a reverse proxy in front of your individual application services.
So it does a couple of things.
It has the central security service processing inside of it.
It will re-direct to the UAA, and process the logon, and generate the security tokens.
It then injects those security tokens into the individual runtimes.
That way, we don't have to have security processing libraries implemented in each of these runtimes,
which really helps, particularly with the Bring Your Own Language,
where we wouldn't be able to write libraries for every possible runtime
that could be plugged into the environment.
But what we do is, we inject the security into these runtimes
as a JWT token, a JSON Web Token.
So it's just a JSON object that can be parsed to look at the security information.
Therefore you can do additional security checks in all of these environments.
You don't have to have special SAML or OAuth processing libraries.
You just have to be able to parse JSON, which just about any language or runtime
is going to have some tools or capabilities to do.
Now the other thing that this application router does is
it can serve out your static HTML content.
But more importantly, it acts as a reverse proxy,
meaning the browser only ever sees the application router,
so it only sees its URL or its port.
And the application router proxies all the URL reports
of the individual application services.
The browser doesn't see them. So this also helps us to avoid CORS -
cross-origin scripting checks in the browser.
So browsers are designed to protect the end user from redirecting a page
that would redirect internally to a different web site.
Because that's how malicious web sites steal your information.
You think you're going to a trusted web site, but inside there,
there's a secret redirect to a malicious web site.
Well the browser can't know that in a microservice environment
that those other sites are safe.
Now there are some mechanisms that we can use to tell the browser that they're safe,
but it's actually easier if we just hide that fact from the browser.
And this is what the application router allows us to do.
Now coming back to the security token,
remember, we injected that security token into our runtimes,
so it knows all the information about our user:
our user name, our e-mail address.
And these users don't any longer have to be HANA database users,
because we're now going to connect to the database
from our Node or Java application service using a technical user.
So this gives us better technical capabilities like connection pooling.
It also means that our application users don't have to be set up in the database.
We separate the idea of a business user from a database user.
So it exposes our database less, yet at the same time,
when we connect to the database, we take that same JWT token
and we inject it into the database as well.
So we can still see that information -
it's available in the session context inside the database -
and we can use it for authorization checks inside the database.
For instance, analytic privileges or structured privileges on calculation views and CDS views
can use this information for instance-based filtering or role-based security.
So even without your user actually being set up in the database,
we can still do authorization checks within the database against your external user
from wherever we're getting it from, the external user store.
So this is something our customers asked us for, you know,
simplify the maintenance, don't make us set up all of our users in the database,
but yet don't give up any authorization checks within the database.
And this is once again kind of the best of both worlds approach.
So for the purpose of taking the certification exam,
I think it's very important to understand this relationship
between the app router and the individual application service processes.
And it's also super important to understand this new security model
and how the technical user works, how the security injection works,
how we can still do analytic privileges and structured privileges.
These are all things you need to have a good grasp on
in order to take this exam.
Now next we can see, in order to prepare for the exam, you want to take the courses,
but the courses also have hands-on exercises.
Now I can't stress enough how important it is to complete some hands-on.
Now none of the questions that are on the exam are going to
absolutely require you to have done the hands-on.
It's not going to ask you like: In this exercise, what did you do?
You know, there isn't going to be anything like that.
But the hands-on exercises are so important, I think,
for really making the concepts concrete
and helping you see exactly what we're talking about.
You know, for us as developers, until we sit down and we actually use the tools
and we develop something, we see it build, and we can then query it in the database,
and things like that, it's just abstract.
And although you can pass the exam with abstract knowledge,
I think you'll have a much easier time passing the exam
if you also have concrete experience using all these new concepts.
And that's why we provide hands-on exercises, quite detailed hands-on exercises.
And even if you don't have access to a system, I strongly encourage you
to read through the hands-on exercise document.
It's very detailed, it's got lots of screenshots,
and you can learn a ton just by reading it.
But if you want to do the exercises and you don't have access,
like your company doesn't provide you a HANA 2.0 system
with XSA and the SAP Web IDE, and things like that,
you can go get the HANA, express edition.
Now HANA express is a lightweight installation of HANA,
designed to install on a developer's own laptop or desktop computer,
and it requires a minimal amount of memory, like 16 GB of memory.
So it's an acceptable amount. You know, it's large.
Not everybody's machine has that amount,
but many do, and it's possible to get a machine that has that amount.
But it's got full HANA capabilities. You can do all the exercises in it.
You could even build productive applications,
meaning you can take them live or re-sell them.
Up to 32 GB of memory in this environment.
Now we offer this as both a binary installation,
if you already have your own Linux OS that you can install yourself,
or more people choose option B, which is a fully built VM, a virtual machine,
that you can run on your own system in a VM player.
So that doesn't require you to have a... you know, you can have a host OS of Windows
or Mac and then run the entire virtual machine inside there.
So that's a very attractive option.
The third option is we offer it in the cloud.
So if you don't have a machine with the necessary 16 GB of memory
then you can run it in the cloud. We make it available in Google Cloud, Azure, AWS,
so there's lots of options. Now of course, that will cost you something.
HANA express itself is free, there's no licensing cost, up to 32 GB of memory,
but if you're going to run it in the cloud then you have to pay the cloud provider
for whatever hardware that you're running it on.
So you're not paying SAP anything, but you're paying the cloud provider for whatever time you run it.
But a little tip there is, only run it the hours that you're using it.
Shut it down other times, and then you only pay for the hours that you need.
And the final point that I want to make is in this new development environment
we're no longer using the HANA studio.
HANA studio is not compatible with Git-based development,
with HDI, with XS advanced. It doesn't understand any of the new development artifacts.
It just absolutely cannot be used.
The new development tool that we have is the SAP Web IDE for SAP HANA.
Now this is a browser-based development tooling environment
that covers the full range of HANA capabilities:
modeling, calculation views, CDS, stored procedures,
but it also has very rich development capabilities for Node.js and Java development,
as well as SAPUI5 and Fiori development.
And it has full Git integration.
So really, it surpasses both the HANA studio
and the SAP HANA Web-based Development Workbench,
adds new capabilities that we've never had before,
and it fully supports all the new programming models.
So obviously, as you take the certification exam
you need to be familiar with the SAP Web IDE for SAP HANA,
the development approaches that are available there,
how the tooling works in that environment.
Only having knowledge of HANA studio or Web-based Development Workbench
would not be enough to pass the certification exam.
And going through the openSAP courses, you'll get an excellent introduction
to the SAP Web IDE for SAP HANA.
So I hope with this little recap of the courses
I've helped to give you some focus points,
or some review points that you want to be well prepared on
in order to take the certification exam.
For everyone that plans to take the certification exam, I wish you luck,
and look forward to seeing all the new certified HANA development people
that we have in the community in the future.